every now and then a movie comes along from a suspect studio , with every indication that it will be a stinker , and to everybody's surprise ( perhaps even the studio ) the film becomes a critical darling . 	pos
mtv films' _election , a high school comedy starring matthew broderick and reese witherspoon , is a current example . 	pos
did anybody know this film existed a week before it opened ? 	pos
the plot is deceptively simple . 	pos
george washington carver high school is having student elections . 	pos
tracy flick ( reese witherspoon ) is an over-achiever with her hand raised at nearly every question , way , way , high . 	pos
"mr . "" m "" ( matthew broderick ) , sick of the megalomaniac student , encourages paul , a popular-but-slow jock to run . "	pos
and paul's nihilistic sister jumps in the race as well , for personal reasons . 	pos
the dark side of such sleeper success is that , because expectations were so low going in , the fact that this was quality stuff made the reviews even more enthusiastic than they have any right to be . 	pos
you can't help going in with the baggage of glowing reviews , which is in contrast to the negative baggage that the reviewers were likely to have . 	pos
_election , a good film , does not live up to its hype . 	pos
what makes _election_ so disappointing is that it contains significant plot details lifted directly from _rushmore_ , released a few months earlier . 	pos
the similarities are staggering : 	pos
tracy flick ( _election_ ) is the president of an extraordinary number of clubs , and is involved with the school play . 	pos
max fischer ( _rushmore_ ) is the president of an extraordinary number of clubs , and is involved with the school play . 	pos
the most significant tension of _election_ is the potential relationship between a teacher and his student . 	pos
the most significant tension of _rushmore_ is the potential relationship between a teacher and his student . 	pos
tracy flick is from a single parent home , which has contributed to her drive . 	pos
max fischer is from a single parent home , which has contributed to his drive . 	pos
the male bumbling adult in _election_ ( matthew broderick ) pursues an extramarital affair , gets caught , and his whole life is ruined . 	pos
he even gets a bee sting . 	pos
the male bumbling adult in _rushmore_ ( bill murray ) pursues an extramarital affair , gets caught , and his whole life is ruined . 	pos
he gets several bee stings . 	pos
and so on . 	pos
what happened ? 	pos
how is it that an individual screenplay ( _rushmore_ ) and a novel ( _election_ ) contain so many significant plot points , and yet both films were probably not even aware of each other , made from two different studios , from a genre ( the high school geeks revenge movie ) that hadn't been fully formed yet ? 	pos
even so , the strengths of _election_ rely upon its fantastic performances from broderick , witherspoon , and newcomer jessica campbell , as paul's anti-social sister , tammy . 	pos
broderick here is playing the mr . rooney role from _ferris bueller_ , and he seems to be having the most fun he's had since then . 	pos
witherspoon is a revelation . 	pos
it's early in the year , it's a comedy , and teenagers have little clout , but for my money , witherspoon deserves an oscar nomination . 	pos
and once campbell's character gets going , like in her fantastic speech in the gymnasium , then you're won over . 	pos
one thing that's been bothering me since i've seen it . 	pos
there is an extraordinary amount of sexuality in this film . 	pos
i suppose that , coming from mtv films , i should expect no less . . . 	pos
but the film starts off light and airy , like a sitcom . 	pos
as the screws tighten , and the tensions mount , alexander payne decides to add elements that , frankly , distract from the story . 	pos
it is bad enough that mr . m doesn't like tracy's determination to win at all costs , but did they have to throw in the student/teacher relationship ? 	pos
even so , there's no logical reason why mr . m has an affair when he does . 	pos
there's a lot to like in _election_ , but the plot similarities to _rushmore_ , and the tonal nosedive it takes as it gets explicitly sex-driven , mark this as a disappointment . 	pos
plot : two teen couples go to a church party , drink and then drive . 	neg
they get into an accident . 	neg
one of the guys dies , but his girlfriend continues to see him in her life , and has nightmares . 	neg
what's the deal ? 	neg
"watch the movie and "" sorta "" find out . . . "	neg
critique : a mind-fuck movie for the teen generation that touches on a very cool idea , but presents it in a very bad package . 	neg
which is what makes this review an even harder one to write , since i generally applaud films which attempt to break the mold , mess with your head and such ( lost highway & memento ) , but there are good and bad ways of making all types of films , and these folks just didn't snag this one correctly . 	neg
they seem to have taken this pretty neat concept , but executed it terribly . 	neg
so what are the problems with the movie ? 	neg
well , its main problem is that it's simply too jumbled . 	neg
"it starts off "" normal "" but then downshifts into this "" fantasy "" world in which you , as an audience member , have no idea what's going on . "	neg
there are dreams , there are characters coming back from the dead , there are others who look like the dead , there are strange apparitions , there are disappearances , there are a looooot of chase scenes , there are tons of weird things that happen , and most of it is simply not explained . 	neg
now i personally don't mind trying to unravel a film every now and then , but when all it does is give me the same clue over and over again , i get kind of fed up after a while , which is this film's biggest problem . 	neg
it's obviously got this big secret to hide , but it seems to want to hide it completely until its final five minutes . 	neg
and do they make things entertaining , thrilling or even engaging , in the meantime ? 	neg
not really . 	neg
the sad part is that the arrow and i both dig on flicks like this , so we actually figured most of it out by the half-way point , so all of the strangeness after that did start to make a little bit of sense , but it still didn't the make the film all that more entertaining . 	neg
"i guess the bottom line with movies like this is that you should always make sure that the audience is "" into it "" even before they are given the secret password to enter your world of understanding . "	neg
i mean , showing melissa sagemiller running away from visions for about 20 minutes throughout the movie is just plain lazy ! ! 	neg
okay , we get it . . . there 	neg
are people chasing her and we don't know who they are . 	neg
do we really need to see it over and over again ? 	neg
how about giving us different scenes offering further insight into all of the strangeness going down in the movie ? 	neg
apparently , the studio took this film away from its director and chopped it up themselves , and it shows . 	neg
"there might've been a pretty decent teen mind-fuck movie in here somewhere , but i guess "" the suits "" decided that turning it into a music video with little edge , would make more sense . "	neg
the actors are pretty good for the most part , although wes bentley just seemed to be playing the exact same character that he did in american beauty , only in a new neighborhood . 	neg
but my biggest kudos go out to sagemiller , who holds her own throughout the entire film , and actually has you feeling her character's unraveling . 	neg
overall , the film doesn't stick because it doesn't entertain , it's confusing , it rarely excites and it feels pretty redundant for most of its runtime , despite a pretty cool ending and explanation to all of the craziness that came before it . 	neg
oh , and by the way , this is not a horror or teen slasher flick . . . it's 	neg
just packaged to look that way because someone is apparently assuming that the genre is still hot with the kids . 	neg
it also wrapped production two years ago and has been sitting on the shelves ever since . 	neg
whatever . . . skip 	neg
it ! 	neg
where's joblo coming from ? 	neg
a nightmare of elm street 3 ( 7/10 ) - blair witch 2 ( 7/10 ) - the crow ( 9/10 ) - the crow : salvation ( 4/10 ) - lost highway ( 10/10 ) - memento ( 10/10 ) - the others ( 9/10 ) - stir of echoes ( 8/10 ) 	pos
